README.md, before:

# 🎧 EulerAudioBackbone

EulerAudioBackbone is a complex-valued autoencoder designed for generative modeling directly on STFT spectrograms. It supports research on neural audio coding, diffusion-ready VAEs, and source separation while preserving analyticity throughout the pipeline.

> [!WARNING]
> This library is just born, I haven't even started writing the full documentation, and it has plenty of bugs; please wait until it's stable.

---

## 📂 Project Structure

Here is a quick overview of the project's root directory:

- **`ar_spectra/`**: The core source code, containing dataset definitions, model architectures, and utility modules.
- **`conf/`**: Configuration files managed by [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/). This is where you define your experiments.
- **`checkpoints/`**: Directory where model checkpoints are saved during or after training.
- **`docs/`**: Detailed documentation for models, trainers, and datasets.
- **`outputs/`** & **`runs/`**: Directories for training logs, outputs, and experiment tracking.
- **`test_metrics/`**: Scripts and tools for evaluating model performance (FAD, spectral distance, etc.).
- **`tools/`**: Utility scripts, such as checkpoint regeneration tools.

---

## 🛠️ Environment Setup

Choose a single workflow and stick to it - either Astral `uv` or a classic virtual environment managed by `pip`.

### Option A - Astral `uv` (recommended)
- Install the `uv` CLI following the official instructions.
- From the repository root run:
  ```bash
  uv sync
  ```
  This creates `.venv/`, installs dependencies from `pyproject.toml`, and honors `uv.lock`.
  - Execute scripts without manual activation:
  ```bash
  uv run train.py
  ```
  - To add packages, edit `pyproject.toml` and re-run `uv sync` (ignore `requirements.txt`) or follow uv official documentation with `uv.add ...` .

> [!IMPORTANT]
> We strongly recommend logging into [Weights & Biases](https://wandb.ai/site) to track your experiments. Run `wandb login` before starting training to enable rich logging and visualization.


---

## ⚙️ Configuration

The project uses **Hydra** for configuration management. The entry point is `conf/config.yaml`.

### How it works
The `conf/config.yaml` file composes the configuration from three main groups:
1. **`data`**: Dataset parameters (path, batch size, etc.).
2. **`model`**: Model architecture settings (encoder/decoder parameters).
3. **`trainer`**: Training loop settings (epochs, learning rate, logging).

You can switch between different configurations by changing the defaults in `conf/config.yaml` or by overriding them via the command line.

---

## 🏋️ Training Workflow

1. **Pick configurations** under `conf/` for the dataset, trainer, and model - you must reference the correct YAML files before launching training. Best practice is to keep the shipped YAML files as templates and apply overrides through Hydra CLI flags or copies stored under `conf/config.yaml`.
2. **Start training** with the environment option you selected:
   - `uv run train.py`
   - `python train.py`
3. **Override hyperparameters** directly from the command line when needed, for example:
   ```bash
   uv run python train.py trainer.trainer.epochs=50 data.train_dataloader.batch_size=16
   ```

---

## 📸 Inference Snapshot

You no longer need to wire Hydra configs to reconstruct the model at inference
time. Checkpoints produced by the updated training loop embed all the metadata
needed by `ar_spectra.models.eulero_inference.EuleroEncodeDecode`.

```python
from ar_spectra.models.eulero_inference import EuleroEncodeDecode

codec = EuleroEncodeDecode("checkpoints/my_model.ckpt")
latents, info = codec.encode_audio(waveform_batch)
recons = codec.decode_audio(latents, info)
```


## Building Models from Configs

When adding new model architectures, you must ensure that your YAML configuration
exposes the parameters required by the trainer to inject channel information.
The training pipeline expects to find:

- `input_size` in the encoder arguments.
- `channels` in the decoder arguments.
- `is_complex` in both encoder and decoder arguments.

These parameters are mandatory because the trainer uses them to adapt the model
to the dataset's specific channel layout (e.g. complex vs. real-as-channels,
mono vs. stereo).

The `is_complex` flag is additionally used during training to decide whether
audio examples logged to Weights & Biases should be packed/unpacked as
real/imaginary channel pairs. Set it explicitly to reflect the dataset output
representation.

Therefore, the model configuration must specify `channels` (decoder) and
`input_size` (encoder) explicitly, or rely on the `auto` placeholder.

When you implement a new autoencoder, prefer subclassing the base classes in
[ar_spectra/models/autoencoders/abstract_ae.py](ar_spectra/models/autoencoders/abstract_ae.py)
so the constructor signatures remain aligned with the expected `input_size`,
`channels`, and `is_complex` parameters, avoiding accidental mismatches at
training time.

- **Using `auto` (Recommended for Training)**: The trainer inspects the dataset
  batch (checking for complex dtype or CAC layout) and automatically injects
  the correct channel counts into the model configuration before instantiation.
  This ensures the model matches the data representation (e.g., complex vs.
  real-as-channels) and channel count (mono vs. stereo). 
- **Using Explicit Values**: If you manually set these integers in the YAML,
  you must ensure they strictly match the dataset output. Mismatches (e.g.,
  configuring 2 channels for a mono dataset) will cause runtime errors.
- **Example of `auto` working**: if the dataset has CAC activated and stereo there is going to be an `input_size` of 4. 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Note on Checkpoints**: Once trained, the resolved values are baked into the
> checkpoint's `inference_config`. The inference loader reads these saved values
> automatically, so you do not need to worry about `auto` resolution when loading
> a trained model.
>
> If there are problems with checkpoint use in inference we suggest the following
> procedure as a fallback.

### Regenerating legacy checkpoints

Older checkpoints that predate the embedded metadata can be upgraded with the
interactive helper in `tools/regenerate_checkpoint.py`. The script rebuilds
the autoencoder from a model YAML, prompts for any missing parameters, and
writes a new checkpoint suffixed with `_rigenerated`:

```bash
uv run python tools/regenerate_checkpoint.py \
  checkpoints/legacy.ckpt \
  conf/model/SEANet_cplx_model.yaml
```

Always use the regenerated artefact for inference and metric runs to guarantee
the presence of the `inference_config` block.

---

## 📚 Documentation

Detailed guidance on configuring data loaders, models, trainers, and inference pipelines lives in the `docs/` folder:
- `docs/model.md`
- `docs/trainer.md`
- `docs/training_dataset.md`
- `docs/metrics.md`

Refer to these documents to understand configuration fields, recommended overrides, and evaluation best practices.

---

Commit message:

eulero open suite -> ar_spectra :-(
- Modified readme

README.md, after:

# 🎧 Eulero Open Suite

Eulero Open Suite is an open source suite for training real valued and complex valued autoencoders It supports research on neural audio coding, diffusion-ready-VAE.

> [!WARNING]
> This library is just born, I haven't even started writing the full documentation, and it has plenty of bugs; please wait until it's stable.

---

## 📂 Project Structure

Here is a quick overview of the project's root directory:

- **`ar_spectra/`**: The core source code, containing dataset definitions, model architectures, and utility modules.
- **`conf/`**: Configuration files managed by [Hydra](https://hydra.cc/). This is where you define your experiments.
- **`checkpoints/`**: Directory where model checkpoints are saved during or after training.
- **`docs/`**: Detailed documentation for models, trainers, and datasets.
- **`outputs/`** & **`runs/`**: Directories for training logs, outputs, and experiment tracking.
- **`test_metrics/`**: Scripts and tools for evaluating model performance (FAD, spectral distance, etc.).
- **`tools/`**: Utility scripts, such as checkpoint regeneration tools.

---

## 🛠️ Environment Setup

Choose a single workflow and stick to it - either Astral `uv` or a classic virtual environment managed by `pip`.

### Option A - Astral `uv` (recommended)
- Install the `uv` CLI following the official instructions.
- From the repository root run:
  ```bash
  uv sync
  ```
  This creates `.venv/`, installs dependencies from `pyproject.toml`, and honors `uv.lock`.
  - Execute scripts without manual activation:
  ```bash
  uv run train.py
  ```
  - To add packages, edit `pyproject.toml` and re-run `uv sync` (ignore `requirements.txt`) or follow uv official documentation with `uv.add ...` .

> [!IMPORTANT]
> We strongly recommend logging into [Weights & Biases](https://wandb.ai/site) to track your experiments. Run `wandb login` before starting training to enable rich logging and visualization.


---

## ⚙️ Configuration

The project uses **Hydra** for configuration management. The entry point is `conf/config.yaml`.

### How it works
The `conf/config.yaml` file composes the configuration from three main groups:
1. **`data`**: Dataset parameters (path, batch size, etc.).
2. **`model`**: Model architecture settings (encoder/decoder parameters).
3. **`trainer`**: Training loop settings (epochs, learning rate, logging).

You can switch between different configurations by changing the defaults in `conf/config.yaml` or by overriding them via the command line.

---

## 🏋️ Training Workflow

1. **Pick configurations** under `conf/` for the dataset, trainer, and model - you must reference the correct YAML files before launching training. Best practice is to keep the shipped YAML files as templates and apply overrides through Hydra CLI flags or copies stored under `conf/config.yaml`.
2. **Start training** with the environment option you selected:
   - `uv run train.py`
   - `python train.py`
3. **Override hyperparameters** directly from the command line when needed, for example:
   ```bash
   uv run python train.py trainer.trainer.epochs=50 data.train_dataloader.batch_size=16
   ```

---

## 📸 Inference Snapshot

You no longer need to wire Hydra configs to reconstruct the model at inference
time. Checkpoints produced by the updated training loop embed all the metadata
needed by `ar_spectra.models.eulero_inference.EuleroEncodeDecode`.

```python
from ar_spectra.models.eulero_inference import EuleroEncodeDecode

codec = EuleroEncodeDecode("checkpoints/my_model.ckpt")
latents, info = codec.encode_audio(waveform_batch)
recons = codec.decode_audio(latents, info)
```


## Building Models from Configs

When adding new model architectures, you must ensure that your YAML configuration
exposes the parameters required by the trainer to inject channel information.
The training pipeline expects to find:

- `input_size` in the encoder arguments.
- `channels` in the decoder arguments.
- `is_complex` in both encoder and decoder arguments.

These parameters are mandatory because the trainer uses them to adapt the model
to the dataset's specific channel layout (e.g. complex vs. real-as-channels,
mono vs. stereo).

The `is_complex` flag is additionally used during training to decide whether
audio examples logged to Weights & Biases should be packed/unpacked as
real/imaginary channel pairs. Set it explicitly to reflect the dataset output
representation.

Therefore, the model configuration must specify `channels` (decoder) and
`input_size` (encoder) explicitly.

When you implement a new autoencoder, prefer subclassing the base classes in
[ar_spectra/models/autoencoders/abstract_ae.py](ar_spectra/models/autoencoders/abstract_ae.py)
so the constructor signatures remain aligned with the expected `input_size`,
`channels`, and `is_complex` parameters, avoiding accidental mismatches at
training time.

- 
- **Using Explicit Values**: 
  You must ensure channels params strictly match the dataset output. Mismatches (e.g.,
  configuring 2 channels for a mono dataset) will cause runtime errors.
- **Example of `auto` working**: if the dataset has CAC activated and stereo there is going to be an `input_size` of 4. 

> [!IMPORTANT]
> **Note on Checkpoints**: Once trained, the resolved values are baked into the
> checkpoint's `inference_config`. The inference loader reads these saved values
> automatically, so you do not need to worry about `auto` resolution when loading
> a trained model.
>
> If there are problems with checkpoint use in inference we suggest the following
> procedure as a fallback.

### Regenerating legacy checkpoints

Older checkpoints that predate the embedded metadata can be upgraded with the
interactive helper in `tools/regenerate_checkpoint.py`. The script rebuilds
the autoencoder from a model YAML, prompts for any missing parameters, and
writes a new checkpoint suffixed with `_rigenerated`:

```bash
uv run python tools/regenerate_checkpoint.py \
  checkpoints/legacy.ckpt \
  conf/model/SEANet_cplx_model.yaml
```

Always use the regenerated artefact for inference and metric runs to guarantee
the presence of the `inference_config` block.

---

## 📚 Documentation

Detailed guidance on configuring data loaders, models, trainers, and inference pipelines lives in the `docs/` folder:
- `docs/model.md`
- `docs/trainer.md`
- `docs/training_dataset.md`
- `docs/metrics.md`

Refer to these documents to understand configuration fields, recommended overrides, and evaluation best practices.

---
